# CHANGES

## NEXT

* Adds basic `merge_or_mark.pl` script for merging data generated by `bwa_mem.pl`.

## 4.4.1

* `bamToBw.pl` correct to send stdout/err to file when threads are active.

## 4.4.0

* Adds local docker file to support large scale data tests on internal CI platform
* CWL and additional helper scripts etc will continue to be supported through the dockstore-cgpmap project.

## 4.3.4

* Further changes to threaded module to improve reliability under singularity

## 4.3.3

* Remove explicit `sync` for several reasons
  * No longer `chmod` scripts
  * Causes problems with heavily loaded shared file systems (sync hangs)

## 4.3.2

* Add options for input/output of CRAM in mismatchQc and mmFlagModifier
* Correct mem free issue when writing CRAM in mismatchQc and mmFlagModifier
* Resolved #40 - faster recovery times
* Resolved #39 - handle splitting correctly

## 4.3.1

* Added -p flag to program commandline output in BAM header @PG line

## 4.3.0

* Removed duplicate flag from `BAD_FLAGS` variable in mismatchQC script
* Added `mmFlagModifier` script to remove/reinstate QC_fail flag where `mm:A:Y` tag is found.

## 4.2.7

* scripts generated by Threaded.pm now always sync'ed
* remove need to chmod, reduce issues under docker, less file ops

## 4.2.6

* New bam file added with mini reference for cram formatting test.
* This prevents travis timeout issues where the reference area is being searched for by bamvalidate

## 4.2.5

* mismatchQC has added commandline parameter - used by default
* checks that reads marked as properly paired are in the correct orientations for paired-end (F/R)
* if not then the properly paired flag is removed.

## 4.2.4

Fixed bam_stats outputs to be more consistent with pre 4.1.0.

The addition of the ability to count QC-Failed reads (previously completely excluded)
had resulted in mapping stats being augmented by this class of reads instead of just total reads
and the `#qcfail_reads[12]` fields.

## 4.2.3

* Missing default value for `bwa_mem.pl` option `-f|fragment` fixed.
* Documentation corrections.

## 4.2.2

* Update `Bio::DB::HTS` to v2.10

## 4.2.1

* Fix for input type of CRAM.

## 4.2.0

* Add threadpool to `bam_stats` and `diff_bams`. Fixes #18, Fixes #19
* bwa_mem.pl can use threads for `bam_stats`

## 4.1.4

* Ensure `sentinel` calls exit with non-zero exit code. Fixes #16

## 4.1.3

* Some issues with indexing slipped through

## 4.1.2

* Clean up the biobambam2 version test
* Bump biobambam2 version, primarily to include script for cleaning mmqc processed data
* Add version option to reheadSQ
* Change travis tests to output version so less verbose

## 4.1.1

* Expose `-a|overlap` option in `bamToBw.pl`.

## 4.1.0

* `bam_stats` now calculates number of `qc_fail` reads (flag 512/0x200).
* `mismatchQc` script added to set flag 512 and aux tag 'mm:A:Y' when a read exceeds a mismatch
threshold.
* `bwa_mem.pl` has new options:
  * readgroup information can be loaded from a `yaml` file when fastq used as input.
  * Options to enable use of `mismatchQc` in processing
* Docs point to dockstore wrapper and image.
* `biobambam2` now installed to a subfolder so need to extend `PATH` appropriately.

## 4.0.5

* bam_stats now outputs a line of zeroes for bam files with zero reads

## 3.5.0

* Adds RNA downloads to PanCancer download tool `gnos_pull.pl`
* Hardening of external process handling in `PCAP::Threaded`
* Adds C version of `diff_bams`

## 3.4.0

* Significant speed up of BAM generation under `bwa_mem.pl` by using separate process to do compression of mark duplicate output and streaming BAS generation. Not possible to do this to CRAM in same way.

## 3.3.4

* Reduce disk usage when running `bwa_mem.pl`
* Improve throughput via slightly unintuitive use of additional pipes

## 3.3.0

* adds `map_threads|mt` option to `bwa_mem.pl` to allow more control of parallel processing in one shot submission.
* adds `bwa_pl|l` option to `bwa_mem.pl` to allow preload of different malloc libraries.

## 3.2.0

* Move from legacy kent bigwig manipulation code and to [`cgpBigWig`](https://github.com/cancerit/cgpBigWig)
  * Faster and handles the huge number of contigs in many new reference builds.
  * Resulting changes to underlying installed tools is `bwcat` now `bwjoin` to be more descriptive of actual function.

## 3.1.1

Handle recent changes to BioPerl structure

## 3.1.0

* Use BWA default for `-T` previously hard coded to `-T 0`.
  * Can be passed through `bwa_mem.pl` other ags to bwa via the `-b` option.
* Fix `bam2bedgraph` compilation since changes to underlying libraries
* `bamToBw.pl` - expose read flag filters
* Drop dependancy on `Bio::DB::HTS INSTALL.pl` as can't fix to known good version.
* Added travis CI
* Add support for output directly to CRAM
* `bwa` version upgraded to [0.7.15](https://github.com/lh3/bwa/releases/tag/v0.7.15)

## 3.0.0

* Threading module now converts currently running step to bash script for following reasons:
  * Changes logging to use file redirects instead of Capture::Tiny - prevent log bleed into wrong files
  * Commands for failed jobs remain after shutdown for easy debug/testing
* Log and progress file names simplified so more portable.

## 2.4.1

* Modified reheadSQ to be more robust.

## 2.1.0

* Adds `xam_coverage_bins.pl` which calculates fraction of targets covered at various depths (BAM/CRAM), using BED/GFF3 as target bait file.

## 2.0.0

* bwa_mem.pl
  * allow user to specify BWA mapping parameters
  * now accepts CRAM as input
* bamToBw.pl - now accepts CRAM as input.
* bam_stats - Adds 2 new stats:
  * `#_mapped_pairs`
  * `#_inter_chr_pairs`
* Dependancy changes
  * __WARNING__: ensure all related tools handle these updates
  * [samtools](https://github.com/samtools/samtools/releases), now only uses htslib based versions (1.3+, handling deprecated use of sort)
  * [Bio::DB::HTS](http://search.cpan.org/~rishidev/Bio-DB-HTS/lib/Bio/DB/HTS.pm) htslib bindings replacing Bio::DB::Sam

## 1.14.0

* bwa_mem.pl - Option to disable duplicate marking

## 1.13.0

* bam_stats - Unit tests for C code
* bam_stats - Fix to median insert size calculation

## 1.11.0

* bam_stats - new rna switch to give more appropriate insert size stats
* bam_stats - more robust handling of optional RG header entries
* bam_stats - allows streaming IO (thanks to @jenniferliddle)
* bwa_mem.pl - Handle `'` in RG header line/IDs
* Generally improved version handling and updated versions of some tools.

## 1.9.1

* Changed final log folder to include sample name and analysis type, prevents clash when lots of data to same output loc.

## 1.9.0

* Fix bugs #52 and #53
* Modified bwa_mem.pl to accept multi-readgroup BAM as input

## 1.7.1

* Turns out BWA mem still requires fixmates to get proper isize distributions
* bumped biobambam to [0.0.191](https://github.com/gt1/biobambam/releases/tag/0.0.191-release-20150401083643)

## 1.7.0

* Switched to bam_stats C in ``bwa_mem.pl``.
* Updates to ``bam_to_sra.pl`` to prevent bad SM values in unaligned BAM uploads.

## 1.6.0

* Adding local file mode for sites that cannot download from GNOS when the xml_to_bas.pl script runs
* [gnos_pull.pl](https://github.com/ICGC-TCGA-PanCancer/PCAP-core/wiki/Scripts-PanCancer-Specific#gnos_pullpl) - see linked docs

## 1.5.4

* bam_stats C
  * Reference file parameter is now optional to replicate bam_stats.pl functionality.
  * Warnings in help, and when a cram file is given as reference from header may not be found, and bam stats will fail.

## 1.5.3

* bam_stats C - changed array for khash in insert size calculations in order to make code more robust.
* Header RG line reading now reads anything not a tab or newline as it should when determining what the values of tags are.

## 1.5.2

* bamToBw.pl fixes
  * Pull actual binaries from jkent_util not html page associated
  * process name corrections in bamToBw.pm command line args

## 1.5.1

* bam_stats c now has CRAM support.
* Also dropped need for samtools v1.x api as can be handled by htslib on it's own.

## 1.5.0

* bamToBw.pl and new biobambam dep

No changes to old tools, just additions and prep for handling CRAM input.

## 1.4.0

bam_stats in C, less than 2 hours to generate stats on a sample level BAM file of ~120GB.

## 1.3.0

* bam_stats.pl is now multi-threaded, can get ~50% runtime reduction with 3-4 threads, memory still <500MB.
* Upgrades biobambam to 0.0.185 (and dependencies).

## 1.2.3

xml_to_bas.pl - detect readgroup id clashes and attempt to reconcile, #54

## 1.2.2

Fixed bug in bwa_mem.pl when using '-f' option on paired fastq.

## 1.2.1

Makes xml_to_bas.pl more robust on AWS. Retrieved XML was being truncated on some network configurations.

## 1.2.0

Modifications made to the bwa_mem.pl code to split a lane of data into fragments to reduce failure recovery time. Primarily added to handle X10 data better.

Also updated samtools to 0.1.20, last version that is currently compatible with Bio::DB::Sam.

## 1.1.1

Fix missing dependancy and build a relocatable version of biobambam suitable for use in artifactory.

## 1.1.0

* Minor enhancement to bwa_mem.pl to automatically generate the `*.bas` file.
* Added xml_to_bas.pl for pancancer users, see the wiki for details.
* Fixed a few minor issues, #36, #37, #39

## 1.0.4

* Install biobambam 0.0.142 to prevent over-counting of duplicates when multiple
libraries, also required libmaus 0.0.124.
* Improve install for those working with multiple perl installs.
* Improve version inheritance, less code

## 1.0.3

* Corrected issue from dynamic de-reference of hash, issue for pre 5.14 perl
and potentially unstable in future.
* Added missing project code to cv terms.
* Bug-fixed upgrade path, still needs better solution.
* Cleaned up messaging in Threaded module.

## 1.0.2

* Upgrade install to pull biobambam 0.0.138
  * fastqtobam option 'pairedfile' for where readnames don't have trailing '/1' or '/2'.
  * fastqtobam option to relax qscore validation without turning off... careful
* Upgrade install to pull BWA 0.7.8
  * performance improvements for short read alignment (100bp)

## 1.0.1

* Upgrade install to pull biobambam 0.0.135
  * fastqtobam supports Casava v1.8
  * bamsort supports NM/MD correction during sam->bam/merge process
* Minor enhancement to BAS reader module.
* Sample name from command line passed through to SM of RG header in bwa_mem.pl
* SRA.pm - check that rg id is unique within run of code (thanks to Junjun Zhang)
* Threads.pm - join interval is now configurable.

## 1.0.0

* bam_stats.pl actually installed now.
* Basic `*.bas` perl access module.
* Upgraded libmaus/biobambam to resolve patch and CentOS install issue.
* Reference implementations ensure unique RG:ID between files.

## 0.3.0

* Changes for the re-worked PanCancer submission SOP.
* Patch for libmaus issue as not going to be a release in time.
* Bug fix for `*.info` files (bam_to_sra_sub.pl).
* Added bam_stats.pl.
* Project is now defaulted when not provided (bam_to_sra_sub.pl).

## 0.2.0 14-Mar-2014

* Updated biobambam version
* Documented additional dependencies
* Improved install implementation

## 0.0.2-beta2 04-Feb-2014

* Updated module naming in preparation for publication to GitHub.
* Added license boiler plate.
* bam_to_sra_sub.pl generates valid XML for GNOS, some features disabled until modifications to GNOS can be made (warnings indicate this on execution)

## 0.0.2-beta 29-Jan-2014

* Pre release with basic SRA XML generation (GENOS)
* Updated requirements for biobambam of 0.0.120
* Tests update to reflect change in biobambam requirement

## 0.0.1 11-Sep-2013

* Initial codebase for PanCancer alignment with BWA 0.6.2.
